Harry Potter lives with his abusive uncle and aunt, Vernon and Petunia Dursley, and their bullying son, Dudley. On Harry's eleventh birthday, Rubeus Hagrid, a half-giant, delivers an acceptance letter from Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry, revealing that Harry's parents, James and Lily Potter, were wizards. When Harry was just a year old, a powerful but malevolent dark wizard named Lord Voldemort murdered his parents; Harry survived Voldemort's killing curse that rebounded and seemingly destroyed the Dark Lord, leaving a lightning bolt-shaped scar on his forehead. Unknown to Harry, this act made him famous in the wizarding world. Hagrid escorts Harry to Diagon Alley, the hidden wizard commerce and retail section in London. Harry's parents have left him a fortune kept in Gringotts Wizarding Bank, which he uses to buy school supplies and a wand from Ollivander's. The cores of Harry and Lord Voldemort's wands have feathers from the same phoenix bird, making them "brothers". Hagrid gifts Harry an owl, whom he names as Hedwig, as a birthday present. A month later, Harry boards the Hogwarts Express at King's Cross railway station's secret Platform 9+3⁄4. En route to Hogwarts, Harry befriends fellow first year Ron Weasley and meets Hermione Granger, whom the two boys initially dislike. Harry runs afoul of Draco Malfoy, the spoiled son of a prominent wizard. At Hogwarts, a magical Sorting Hat sorts the first years among four school Houses (Gryffindor, Hufflepuff, Ravenclaw, and Slytherin) that best suit their personalities and talents. Draco joins Slytherin, known for producing dark wizards, while Harry, Ron, and Hermione are sorted into Gryffindor. Harry's broomstick flying ability earns him a place on the Gryffindor Quidditch team as the Seeker. Harry comes to dislike Potions master Severus Snape, who favours Slytherin while seeking to fail Harry. Malfoy tricks Harry and Ron into risking expulsion by leaving their common room after curfew. Hermione, unable to stop them, tags along. Realising Malfoy's ruse, they hide in a forbidden corridor and discover a gigantic three-headed dog guarding a trapdoor. Harry and Ron later save Hermione from a troll during a Halloween celebration and the three become best friends. Coupled with Snape's recent leg injury and suspicious behaviour, Harry, Ron, and Hermione believe he is attempting to enter the trapdoor. During Harry's first Quidditch match, his broomstick attempts to buck him off. Snape's strange behaviour during the match convinces Hermione he jinxed Harry's broom. Harry receives an anonymous Christmas gift – his father's invisibility cloak. Using it to explore the school, he discovers the Mirror of Erised, which shows what the viewer most desires. Harry sees his parents. A newspaper report later describes an attempted robbery at the same vault in Gringotts from which Hagrid retrieved an item for Hogwarts' headmaster Albus Dumbledore on the same day. The object beneath the trapdoor is the philosopher's stone, which grants its user immortality and the ability to turn any metal into pure gold. Firenze, a forest centaur, warns Harry that Voldemort is plotting to steal the stone to restore his body. When Dumbledore is lured from Hogwarts under false pretences, Harry, Hermione, and Ron fear the theft is imminent and descend through the trapdoor. Various obstacles force Ron and Hermione to remain behind while Harry proceeds. Harry encounters Professor Quirrell, the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. He jinxed Harry's broom and let the troll into the school; Snape was protecting Harry. Voldemort, whose face has regrown on the back of Quirrell's head, is revealed to be the professor's secret master. Harry is forced to stand before the Mirror of Erised. It recognises Harry's lack of greed for the stone and deposits it into his pocket. Quirrell attempts to seize the stone, but his flesh burns upon contact with Harry. Harry's scar begins hurting, and he passes out. Harry awakens in the school's infirmary. He survived Voldemort because his mother sacrificing her life for him left a magical protective charm. Quirrell's hatred and greed caused him to burn upon contact with Harry; Voldemort abandoned him to die. Dumbledore reveals he sent Harry the invisibility cloak, while the philosopher's stone, that had been keeping the long-lived Nicolas Flamel alive, has been destroyed with Flamel's consent to prevent its being stolen. During the school's year-end feast, Gryffindor is awarded the House Cup. Harry returns to the Dursleys at Privet Drive until the next school year.
While spending the summer at the Dursleys, twelve-year-old Harry Potter is visited by Dobby, a house-elf. He says Harry is in danger and must not return to Hogwarts. Harry refuses, so Dobby magically ruins Aunt Petunia and Uncle Vernon's dinner party. Unaware of Dobby's visit, a furious Uncle Vernon locks Harry in his room. The Ministry of Magic sends a notice accusing Harry of performing underage magic and threatening dismissal from Hogwarts. The three Weasley brothers, Ron, Fred and George, arrive in their father's flying Ford Anglia and rescue Harry, taking him to their home. Harry and the Weasley family travel to Diagon Alley for school supplies. They run into Hermione Granger and meet Lucius Malfoy, father of Draco, and also Gilderoy Lockhart, a conceited autobiographer and adventurer who is the new Defence Against the Dark Arts professor. At King's Cross station, Harry and Ron cannot enter Platform 9¾ and miss the Hogwarts Express. They fly in Mr Weasley's car to Hogwarts, crashing into the Whomping Willow on school grounds and damaging Ron's wand. The car then escapes into the forest. Later, Harry is the only one who hears a strange voice emanating from the castle walls. Soon after, Mr Filch's cat, Mrs Norris, is found petrified, along with a bloody warning scrawled on a wall: "The Chamber of Secrets has been opened. Enemies of the heir, beware". Salazar Slytherin, one of the school's founders, created the Chamber after a dispute with fellow founders on admitting Muggle-born students. Some in the wizarding community disdain Muggle-born wizards like Hermione, believing pure-bloods are superior. The Chamber supposedly houses a monster that only the Heir of Slytherin can control. During a Quidditch game, a rogue Bludger strikes Harry, breaking his arm. Lockhart blunders an attempt to repair it, sending Harry to the hospital overnight. Dobby visits Harry and reveals he jinxed the Bludger and sealed the portal at King's Cross. He says the Chamber of Secrets was once opened years before. Dobby also tells Harry that house-elfs like himself serve one master their entire life, and cannot be freed unless given proper clothing. After another attack, students attend a defensive duelling class, during which Harry exhibits a rare ability to speak 'Parseltongue', the language of snakes. Harry, Ron, and Hermione suspect Draco is the Heir, given his hostility toward Muggle-borns. Hermione brews Polyjuice Potion, allowing Harry and Ron to impersonate Draco's lackeys Crabbe and Goyle. They learn that Draco knows nothing about the heir. Meanwhile, Moaning Myrtle, a ghost that haunts a girls' bathroom, shows the trio a diary left in her stall. It belonged to Tom Riddle, a student who witnessed another student's death during the Chamber's previous opening. Riddle's consciousness within the diary claims that Hagrid was responsible. Hermione is petrified in the next attack. The school is put on lockdown and may close. Headmaster Albus Dumbledore is forced out and Hagrid is sent to Azkaban prison. Following instructions left by Hagrid, Harry and Ron follow spiders into the Forbidden Forest. They encounter Aragog, a gigantic Acromantula which denies its involvement, and claims spiders fear the real monster. Aragog attempts to feed Harry and Ron to its progeny, but Mr Weasley's car rescues them. Harry and Ron discover that Hermione deduced the monster is a basilisk – a gigantic snake whose direct gaze kills and petrifies victims when seen in a reflection. The basilisk is the voice in the walls, and it travels through the plumbing. Moaning Myrtle was the student that was killed. Ron's sister Ginny is abducted and taken into the Chamber. Harry and Ron discover the entrance in Myrtle's bathroom, and force Lockhart to enter it with them. Lockhart confesses he is a fraud who made up all of his stories and attempts to erase the boys' memories after stealing Ron's damaged wand. The spell backfires, obliterating his own memory, and causes a cave-in; Ron is separated from Harry and stays behind to help Lockhart. Harry proceeds to the Chamber and finds an unconscious Ginny. A manifestation of Tom Riddle reveals he is Lord Voldemort and the Heir of Slytherin. He opened the Chamber and framed Hagrid. He has been using the diary to possess and control Ginny, who had been behaving strangely. The basilisk appears to kill Harry. Dumbledore's phoenix Fawkes arrives, bringing Harry the Sorting Hat. Fawkes blinds the basilisk and Harry pulls the Sword of Godric Gryffindor from the Hat. He slays the basilisk but is poisoned by its venom. As Riddle taunts the dying Harry, Fawkes' tears heal Harry. Harry stabs Riddle's diary with a severed basilisk fang, destroying it and Riddle's body, and reviving Ginny. Harry, Ron, Ginny, and Lockhart return to the castle. Harry gives the diary to Dumbledore. Lucius bursts in, furious that Dumbledore returned. He is accompanied by Dobby, who is the Malfoys' house-elf and was working to protect Harry. Harry realizes that Lucius slipped the diary into Ginny's cauldron while they were in Diagon Alley to open the Chamber. Harry tricks Lucius into freeing Dobby from servitude by giving him a sock; Lucius attempts to attack Harry in revenge, but Dobby repels him. The petrified students are cured, Gryffindor wins the House Cup again, Hagrid is released, Lockhart is confined to St. Mungo's Hospital, and Harry returns to Privet Drive in high spirits.
While Harry is living with the Dursleys, Aunt Marge comes to visit. When he and his late parents are insulted by Marge, an angry Harry accidentally inflates her. Harry packs up his stuff and leaves the house, choosing to spend the last weeks of summer at the Leaky Cauldron inn in London. While there, Harry is warned that a former follower of Voldemort, named Sirius Black, is seeking him out after having escaped from the wizard prison, Azkaban. At Hogwarts, the guards of Azkaban, known as the Dementors, patrol the school looking for Black. Harry is unusually affected by their presence, and asks help from Remus Lupin, the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher, in learning to repel them. Lupin teaches Harry the incredibly difficult Patronus charm, but Harry is able to produce a full-bodied Patronus to fight off the Dementors. Meanwhile, Black is reported to have been sighted in the village of Hogsmeade, close to Hogwarts. Harry is given a secret map by Fred and George Weasley, which reveals everyone inside the castle and its grounds. Harry uses it to sneak into Hogsmeade without permission. Hiding inside a pub, he overhears a conversation in which he learns that Black is actually his godfather, and that he killed his own best friend, Peter Pettigrew, while also betraying Harry's father, James, to Voldemort. Harry, Ron and Hermione visit Hagrid at his hut, and are surprised to find Ron's missing pet rat, Scabbers, hiding there. As they walk back to the castle with Scabbers, Ron is attacked by a large dog. The dog drags Ron into a secret tunnel and disappears, coming out on the other side, inside the Shrieking Shack in Hogsmeade. The dog is revealed to be Black in his Animagus form. Harry and Hermione reach the Shack, followed by Lupin, who spots them on Harry's map. Lupin disarms Harry, then explains why he believes Black to be innocent. Black claims that the crimes attributed to him were actually committed by Pettigrew, who escaped suspicion by faking his own death. Pettigrew is also an Animagus, and has been hiding as Ron's rat Scabbers this whole time. Harry suggests handing Pettigrew over to the Dementors. While walking back to the castle, the full moon suddenly emerges and Lupin, secretly a werewolf, starts transforming. Black turns into the dog to protect the others, and Pettigrew escapes amid the chaos. Harry, Hermione and Black are accosted by Dementors, and Black ends up being captured. While Black is held captive inside a tower in Hogwarts, Dumbledore confirms with Harry and Hermione that he is indeed innocent. He instructs them to save Black, by going back in time and setting him free, before he is handed over to the Dementors. Using a Time Turner, which Hermione has had since the beginning of the year to get to all her classes, they travel back a few hours. Present-day Harry saves his past self, and the past versions of Hermione and Black from Dementors using a Patronus. He then allows Black to be captured by Snape, before using Hagrid's hippogriff, Buckbeak, to release him from the tower and escape. The next day, Lupin is forced to resign as his secret identity as a werewolf is now known to the school. Harry is upset at not spending more time with his godfather, Black, but Dumbledore asks him to take comfort in having saved his life. On the train journey back to London, Harry receives a letter from Black, who also sends a replacement pet owl for Ron.
Over the summer, the Weasleys invite Harry Potter to attend the Quidditch World Cup final, played between Bulgaria and the Republic of Ireland. The match ends in a victory for the Irish, but the campsite is attacked by Voldemort's former followers called the Death Eaters. Nobody is killed, but the Dark Mark is set off and found to have been cast by Barty Crouch's house-elf, Winky. Hogwarts reopens and a new tournament is announced between three schools to compete for the Triwizard Cup. The other competing schools are Beauxbatons and Durmstrang. Students excitedly await the start of the Tournament, which is declared open after the visiting teams arrive. The Goblet of Fire, a magical object tasked with selecting the champions, is unveiled. It names three champions, one from each of the schools, and then selects Harry as a fourth champion, despite his being underage. The students perceive Harry has cheated and turn on him. Rubeus Hagrid believes in Harry's innocence and shows him the dragons involved in the First Task. Harry alerts Cedric Diggory, son of Amos Diggory, to the challenge and is helped by "Mad-Eye" Moody, ex-Auror and the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher, to prepare for the task. Using his superior flying skills, Harry gets past the dragon and retrieves a clue for the next task. A Yule Ball is announced and Harry must find a partner, as champions traditionally commence the opening dance. Harry and Ron Weasley struggle initially to get partners, but end up going with the "prettiest girls in their year" – Parvati and Padma Patil. Ron gets jealous seeing Hermione Granger with Viktor Krum, the Durmstrang champion, and spends the night arguing with her. Harry is sullen that Cho Chang is with Cedric, the other Hogwarts champion. The Second Task requires saving a close friend or relative from the lake. Harry uses Gillyweed, given to him by Dobby, to breathe underwater. He rescues Ron from the lake, while also saving the Beauxbatons champion Fleur Delacour's sister out of fear that she will drown if Fleur cannot rescue her in time. After the task, Harry and Krum discover a seemingly mad Barty Crouch on the Hogwarts grounds, but he has vanished when they return. The Quidditch field is prepared for the Third (and final) Task, and requires champions to overcome a maze filled with obstacles. Harry and Cedric succeed in reaching the centre, where the Triwizard Cup is placed. They touch it together, but are transported outside Hogwarts to a muggle graveyard. Cedric believes this is part of the Task, but Harry gets alerted when his scar starts burning wildly. Wormtail arrives with Lord Voldemort and kills Cedric with the latter's wand. Subduing an injured and gagged Harry with tight cords to Thomas Riddle Sr's grave, he then uses Harry's blood to restore a frail Voldemort back to his full, physical body. Voldemort summons his Death Eaters and tries to kill Harry in front of them. He fails when his and Harry's wand streams of green and red connect, in a rare phenomenon called Priori Incantatem. This causes a distraction by seeming to summon the ghosts of those that Lord Voldermort’s wand has killed, including Harry’s parents, allowing Harry to escape back to Hogwarts using the Cup. At Hogwarts, Moody pulls Harry into his office to question him and Harry realises that he is a Death Eater. He is saved by the arrival of Dumbledore, McGonagall and Snape, who force Moody to reveal himself to be Barty Crouch Jr, a Death Eater formerly presumed dead. He had been imprisoned in Azkaban for supporting Voldemort and had escaped by leaving his mother in his place using Polyjuice Potion. Crouch Jr had then been placed under the Imperius Curse by his father until he had managed to break out of it during the Quidditch World Cup and cast the Dark Mark. He had then imprisoned the real Moody and impersonated him using more Polyjuice Potion. Arriving at Hogwarts, he made sure that Harry won the Tournament and was transported to the graveyard for Voldemort's ritual; his only wish is that Voldemort rise to the power he once had. His father had been placed under the Imperius Curse after Crouch Jr's escape, but had started to resist it and so had been killed. Crouch Jr is handed over to the Dementors. Harry recovers in the hospital wing, surrounded by Ron, Hermione and the Weasleys. He meets with Cedric's grieving parents, while Dumbledore makes plans to prepare the wizarding world for Voldemort's return. The school year ends and Harry returns to live with the Dursleys again for the summer.
During the summer, Harry Potter is frustrated by his friends' non-communication and with Dumbledore barring him from helping combat a newly-resurgent Lord Voldemort. One evening, Dementors attack him and cousin Dudley, but Harry fends them off using the Patronus Charm. Later, Order of the Phoenix members arrive at the Dursley house to evacuate Harry. They whisk him off to Number 12, Grimmauld Place, Sirius Black's family home, which is now the Order's headquarters. Ron and Hermione are there and tell Harry that the Order is a secret organisation that Dumbledore created to fight Voldemort and the Death Eaters. Harry wants to join but is still too young. The Ministry of Magic, under Cornelius Fudge, attempt to malign Harry for stating that Voldemort has returned. Harry is also charged with performing underage magic while with a Muggle, but is exonerated and returns to Hogwarts. Dolores Umbridge, a senior Ministry employee, is the new Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher. She initiates strict rules and a textbook-only curriculum and forbids the students from practicing defensive spells. Harry, Ron, and Hermione form a secret student Defense group called Dumbledore's Army. The group secretly meets in the Room of Requirement to practice under Harry's instruction. One night, Harry dreams that Arthur Weasley is attacked by Voldemort's snake, Nagini. His vision is true, and Arthur is found seriously injured at the Ministry. Dumbledore realises that Harry's and Voldemort's minds are connected, and he orders Professor Snape to teach Harry Occlumency, a skill to close one's mind against others. Umbridge is tipped-off about Dumbledore's Army; to prevent Harry's expulsion, Dumbledore claims responsibility for forming the group. To avoid arrest, he goes into hiding. Umbridge is appointed headmistress, though she is magically barred from entering Dumbledore's tower. She begins enacting strict rules and regulations and attempts to dismiss Professor Trelawney. Harry's Occlumency lessons go poorly. During his Ordinary Wizarding Level exams, he envisions Voldemort torturing Sirius in the Department of Mysteries at the Ministry. Harry attempts to contact Sirius at Grimmauld Place, using the Floo Network in Umbridge's office, but she catches and interrogates him, threatening to use the Cruciatus Curse on him. Hermione intervenes by concocting a story that leads them into the Forbidden Forest. Umbridge provokes the centaurs, who take her captive. Harry, Ron, Hermione, Ginny, Neville and Luna fly to the Ministry to save Sirius, but he is not in the Department of Mysteries. Instead, the room in his vision has shelves filled with glass spheres, one of which bears Harry's and Voldemort's names. Harry picks it up and is immediately surrounded by Death Eaters. Lucius Malfoy reveals that Harry was lured there by a fake vision from Voldemort, and that he wishes to hear the prophecy contained in the glass sphere. He asks Harry for the sphere, but Harry refuses. The Hogwarts group fight the Death Eaters and evade them. Order of the Phoenix members (tipped off by Professor Snape) arrive and battle the Death Eaters. Neville accidentally drops the prophecy sphere, breaking it. Later during the battle, Bellatrix Lestrange kills Sirius. Harry chases Bellatrix into the atrium. Voldemort appears and tries to kill Harry, but Dumbledore appears and thwarts him. Fudge and other Ministry of Magic employees arrive on the scene and witness Voldemort just before he escapes. In his office, Dumbledore tells Harry the prophecy was made by Professor Trelawney, who predicted the birth of a child with power against Voldemort. This caused Voldemort to pursue Harry's parents, and is why he targets Harry. Overwhelmed by the prophecy and mourning Sirius' death, Harry grows sullen, although the wizarding community now believes and respects him. Supported by his friends, Harry is able to endure another summer with the Dursleys.
New Minister for Magic, Rufus Scrimgeour, meets with the Muggle prime minister to discuss recent wizarding events affecting the non-magical world. Meanwhile, Harry, grieving his late godfather, Sirius Black, endures another summer at the Dursleys. Dumbledore unexpectedly arrives to escort Harry to the Weasleys' home. First, they visit retired Hogwarts professor Horace Slughorn, whom Dumbledore wants to resume his former post. Slughorn agrees only after meeting the famous Harry Potter. Elsewhere, Bellatrix Lestrange and her sister Narcissa Malfoy secretly seek out Severus Snape at his home. Narcissa asks Snape to make an Unbreakable Vow to protect her son, Draco, and to carry out a task, should he fail. While school shopping in Diagon Alley, Harry, Ron, and Hermione observe Draco suspiciously slipping into Knockturn Alley. On the Hogwarts Express, Harry, wearing his Invisibility Cloak, overhears Draco claim he may not return to Hogwarts the following year to instead, "go on to better things." Harry suspects that Draco may have become a Death Eater. During the Welcome Feast, Slughorn is introduced as the new Potions teacher while Snape is now the Defence Against the Dark Arts instructor. Harry and Ron take Slughorn's advanced potions class. Harry finds a tattered potions textbook bearing the inscription, 'The Half-Blood Prince.' The book contains tips, as well as new spells, scribbled in the book margins that yield better results than the printed instructions. With it, Harry rises to the top of the class and wins a vial of Felix Felicis, a luck-enhancing potion. Hermione says Harry is cheating while Slughorn compares his potions skill to his mother, Lily. Dumbledore begins tutoring Harry on Tom Riddle, aka Voldemort, to prepare him for their foretold battle. He shows Harry memories of Riddle's past, including his meeting young Riddle in an orphanage. One memory from Slughorn's early Hogwarts' days suddenly goes dark when Riddle utters the word, 'horcrux'. This memory has been altered, and Dumbledore tasks Harry with retrieving Slughorn's true one. To that end, Harry attends the Slug Club, an informal group of Slughorn's favourite students. Hermione and Ginny are also included, though Ron is excluded. Hermione invites Ron to Slughorn's Christmas party, but he remains upset about her previous relationship with Viktor Krum and begins seeing Lavender Brown, inducing strong jealousy in Hermione. Harry takes Luna Lovegood to the party but leaves early to follow Draco Malfoy when he gatecrashes the event. Shortly after, Ron is poisoned drinking mead that Slughorn had intended as a gift for Dumbledore. Ron survives but while he is in the infirmary, Lavender breaks up with him when he favors Hermione. Also, Harry and Ginny become romantically involved. Using the Felix Felicis potion, Harry successfully obtains Slughorn's unaltered memory. It reveals how Tom Riddle created six Horcruxes to become immortal. Horcruxes, magical objects encasing one's soul, are created with ancient dark magic. Two, Riddle's diary and a ring, have been destroyed, but Dumbledore believes four Horcruxes remain. Dumbledore discovers another Horcrux location, and he and Harry journey to a remote cave. Inside, a Horcrux is hidden under protective enchantments in the middle of a lake. Dumbledore nearly dies retrieving a Locket Horcrux. Returning to Hogwarts, Dumbledore and Harry see the Dark Mark hovering above the Astronomy Tower. Atop the tower, they hear footsteps approaching. Dumbledore casts a protective spell on Harry, forcing him to watch helplessly when Draco arrives and disarms Dumbledore. A distressed Draco reveals that Voldemort ordered him to murder Dumbledore. He is unable to follow through, however; Snape arrives and casts the Killing Curse at Dumbledore. Released from Dumbledore's protection, Harry pursues Snape, firing a curse at him. Snape easily deflects it. Snape taunts Harry for using his own spell against him and reveals that he is the Half-Blood Prince. Snape escapes with Draco through the ensuing battle between Death Eaters and the Order of the Phoenix. Dumbledore's lifeless body is found at the base of Astronomy Tower. Representatives from all wizarding races attend his funeral. Later, Harry discovers that the Locket Horcrux is fake, switched by someone whose initials are, R.A.B. Ron and Hermione vow to help Harry find and destroy the remaining Horcruxes. To protect Ginny, Harry ends their relationship.
Harry is about to turn seventeen and will lose his deceased mother's magical protection. Order of the Phoenix members relocate the Dursleys for their protection. Harry is being flown to The Burrow, with friends and allies acting as identical decoys. Death Eaters immediately attack, and, in the ensuing battle, "Mad-Eye" Moody and Hedwig are killed while George Weasley is wounded. Voldemort arrives to kill Harry, whose wand fends off the attack. Harry, Ron, and Hermione prepare to hunt down Voldemort's four remaining Horcruxes. Each is bequeathed an object from Dumbledore: a Golden Snitch for Harry, a Deluminator for Ron, and The Tales of Beedle the Bard, for Hermione. Harry is also bequeathed the Sword of Godric Gryffindor, but the Ministry claims it never belonged to Dumbledore. Death Eaters attack during Bill Weasley and Fleur Delacour's wedding reception while the Ministry of Magic falls to Voldemort. The trio flee to 12 Grimmauld Place, Sirius Black's family home that was left to Harry. They discover that Sirius's late brother, Regulus, was the mysterious R.A.B. who stole the Horcrux locket but died in the process. His house-elf Kreacher was unable to destroy the locket, which was later stolen by Mundungus Fletcher. Kreacher locates Fletcher, who says the locket was taken by Ministry official Dolores Umbridge. Infiltrating the Ministry, the trio steal the locket from Umbridge, but Grimmauld Place is compromised in their escape. They flee to the forest and are unable to destroy the locket and have no further leads. The locket's dark nature affects Ron, who abandons the group. Harry and Hermione learn about Dumbledore's past with dark wizard, Gellert Grindelwald. They travel to Godric's Hollow, Harry's birthplace. There they are attacked by Voldemort's snake, Nagini, who inhabited Bathilda Bagshot's corpse. They escape, but Harry's wand is badly damaged. One night, a doe Patronus guides Harry to a pond containing the Sword of Godric Gryffindor. When Harry tries to recover it, the locket tightens around his neck, nearly killing him. Ron, guided back by the Deluminator, saves him and destroys the locket Horcrux with the sword. In Dumbledore's book, Hermione identifies a symbol also worn by Luna Lovegood's father Xenophilius Lovegood. He tells them of the mythical Deathly Hallows: the Elder Wand, an unbeatable wand; the Resurrection Stone, which can summon the dead; and an Invisibility Cloak. Xenophilius fails to say that Luna is being held captive. He summons Death Eaters to capture the trio in exchange for his daughter's freedom, but they escape. They speculate that Dumbledore won the Elder Wand by defeating Grindelwald. Harry's Invisibility Cloak is the third Hallow, and his Snitch contains the Resurrection Stone. The trio are captured and taken to Malfoy Manor. Bellatrix tortures Hermione, believing they stole Gryffindor's sword from her Gringotts vault. With help from Dobby the house-elf, they escape to Bill and Fleur's seaside cottage, along with fellow prisoners, including Luna, Mr Ollivander, and the goblin Griphook. During the escape, Bellatrix fatally wounds Dobby, and Harry hand-digs the house-elf's grave. Harry has a vision of Voldemort stealing the Elder Wand from Dumbledore's tomb. The trio break into Bellatrix's vault, believing another Horcrux is there. With Griphook's help, they break in, retrieve Hufflepuff's cup, and escape, though Griphook steals Gryffindor's sword in the process. Harry has another vision that Voldemort has been informed of the heist and decides to check his Horcruxes. Harry sees that Nagini is a Horcrux, and another is hidden at Hogwarts. Dumbledore's brother, Aberforth, helps the trio enter Hogwarts. Voldemort, alerted to Harry's whereabouts, mounts an assault on Hogwarts. The teachers and students mobilize to defend the school. Ron and Hermione destroy Hufflepuff's cup with basilisk fangs from the Chamber of Secrets and share an impulsive kiss. Harry discovers Ravenclaw's diadem is the Horcrux hidden there. The trio find it in the Room of Requirement but Draco, Crabbe and Goyle ambush them. Crabbe attacks with fiendfyre, but is unable to control it; the cursed fire kills him and destroys the diadem. Meanwhile, many allies die during Voldemort's assault, including Remus Lupin, Nymphadora Tonks, and Fred Weasley. The Elder Wand resists Voldemort's commands. Believing that Snape, having killed Dumbledore, is its true master, he has Nagini attack him just as Harry arrives. Mortally wounded, Snape passes his memories to Harry. Harry views them in the Pensieve. The memories reveal that Snape loved Harry's mother and acted as a double agent against Voldemort in an attempt to protect her. He watched over the trio, conjuring the doe Patronus, influenced by his love for Lily, who also had a doe Patronus. Dumbledore was dying after mishandling the ring Horcrux and planned his "murder" at Snape's hands. Harry also learns he is an unintentional Horcrux, unbeknownst to Voldemort, and must die to render Voldemort mortal. Before surrendering himself, Harry instructs Neville Longbottom to kill Nagini. On the way, he uses the Resurrection Stone to reunite with his parents and other deceased loved ones. He drops the stone as he meets Voldemort, who casts the Killing Curse on him. Harry awakens in a dreamlike location resembling King's Cross where he is greeted by Dumbledore. Dumbledore explains that Voldemort's original Killing Curse left a soul fragment in Harry, causing their connection. The latest Killing Curse destroyed that soul fragment, allowing Harry to return to life or to "go on". Harry returns to life and feigns death. Voldemort calls for a truce at Hogwarts and demands their surrender. Neville, however, pulls Gryffindor's sword from the Sorting Hat and kills Nagini. The battle resumes, with Molly Weasley killing Bellatrix. Harry reveals himself to Voldemort and engages him in a final battle. He explains the Elder Wand's loyalty transfers upon the defeat, not the killing of its former master. Draco, not Snape, had been the Elder Wand's master, having disarmed Dumbledore before Snape killed him. Having disarmed Draco at Malfoy Manor, Harry now commands the Elder Wand. Voldemort casts the Killing Curse at Harry, but the spell rebounds, killing Voldemort. Before returning the Elder Wand to Dumbledore's tomb, Harry uses it to repair his old wand. He keeps his Invisibility Cloak and leaves the Resurrection Stone lost in the forest.